speech-synthesis/README.md, before:

# Building Speech Synthesis for New Languages

Speech synthesis is the task of generating speech from text. It is useful if you want to build a speech interface.
For a speech synthesizer, voice recordings from one person is usually required for consistency and natural sounding output.

## 1. Collecting Data

There are many sources for speech data that can be used to train systems. It'd be a good idea to take a look here to see if there is data that you can use.

* [CMU Wilderness Corpus](https://github.com/festvox/datasets-CMU_Wilderness): This is a very broad corpus with 699 languages.

If there is none, follow the steps in *[Creating Data](#2-creating-data)* section to create a corpus.
## 2. Creating Data
The goal here is to create a speech corpus of aligned speech recordings and their transcriptions to be used to build the synthesizer. 
1. Gather textual sentences in your language. You should aim at getting atleast 1 million words. Keep in mind:
   - The copyright of the data you have gathered; make sure it is sufficient for your usage and distribution needs. [Click here](https://aclanthology.org/L18-1202/) for information on licensing for Natural language Processing.
   - The text should be in the same encoding, see [this resource](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/64860/best-way-to-convert-text-files-between-character-sets) for details on how you can convert between encodings.
2. Select sentences from this corpus to be used to build your synthesizer. There is a quick guide on how to do so [here](selecting-prompts.md). 
 For a detailed explanation, read [this documentation](http://festvox.org/bsv/c2176.html) on how to select "good" sentences
 and follow [these instructions](https://github.com/festvox/datasets-CMU_Wilderness) from CMU Wilderness project from the *Prerequisites* to the *Make Dependencies* sections to install software needed to run the instructions on the documentation.
3. Identify a voice talent (person whose voices are recorded and will be used to build the synthesizer) who is fluent in the language and/or domain you are working on. Details on considerations are [available here](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/cognitive-services/speech-service/record-custom-voice-samples#choose-your-voice-talent).
4. Get consent from your voice talent allowing you to use their voice for your intended usage and distribution purposes. 
5. Guide available [here.](http://festvox.org/bsv/x794.html)
6. Record the selected sentences.

At the end of these steps, you should have your recorded speech corpus ready for the next step.

### Recording tips
* There should be little to no noise, a studio environment is best.
* If you are using a mobile device, you can use an app that will save your recordings in .wav format. 
For iOS you can use [one of these apps](https://www.iosappweekly.com/record-sound-mp3-wav-format-iphone/) for example.
* The distance between the voice talent's mouth and the microphone should be constant, so it is best to use a microphone attached to the speakers head for example using headsets or AirPods
* If you are going to record in multiple sessions, record at the same time period for all your sessions to avoid variations in the voice 
(e.g. at 10:00 am - 12:30 pm - this time is good because it is not right after one gets up and not late in the evening when one is tired, so one's voice is likely at its best).
* The utterances should be consistent in terms of speed etc. Avoid excited speech as it has a lot of variations. 
* If you are recording a bunch of sentences continuously in one recording, make sure the voice talent gives a hint as to which sentence they are reading such that it will be easier to process e.g. 
 
     " ... [PAUSE] sentence nine [PAUSE]  I looked for Mary and Samantha at the bus station. [PAUSE] sentence ten [PAUSE] Jacob stood on his tiptoes.[PAUSE]..... "
* [Click here](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/cognitive-services/speech-service/record-custom-voice-samples#recording-your-script) for more tips.
## 3. Training a Speech Synthesizer
There are generally two approaches to building a speech synthesizer/Text-to-Speech(TTS):
1. Standard/traditional TTS: Uses statistical, traditional machine learning and programming techniques
2. Neural TTS: Uses deep learning techniques

In this guide we will build a speech synthesizer using the standard approach.
Specifically, we are going to build a grapheme based synthesizer as it is easier when you have limited resources. 
For detailed explanation, see the Festvox tutorial on [Grapheme-based synthesizer](http://festvox.org/bsv/c3485.html). 
### 3.1 Prepare your data
If you followed step two above, you have your script file with utterances and corresponding wav files. 
#### a) Align your utterances and wav files
The first step is to make sure that your wav files are aligned with your script.  
Your script should be in the following format:
> ( new_0001 "text in your language ..." )
> 
>( new_0002 "more text in your language ..." )
* Start each sentence with a ( and end with a ) leaving spaces between the brackets and text following/before
* Replace `new` with anything you want, eg your language code or domain, leaving no spaces in between
* The utterance should be in quotation marks
* Precede other quotation marks with a  backslash(/)

Proceed to rename your wav files with the corresponding name. Eg, the first audio will be `FILEID_0001.wav`
#### b) Numbers and symbols
If your script contains digits 0-9 and symbols like $, %, replace them with their word equivalent.
> She gave me $200. - She gave me two hundred dollars.
> 
> My battery level is at 50%. - My battery level is at fifty percent

If you followed the [Selecting Good Prompts](selecting-prompts.md) tutorial you probably won't have these issues.
#### c) Acronyms
You might have  acronyms like *USA* in your utterances.
You might want to change the text to how it is pronounced in your language. For example in my language I would change:
> She travelled to USA -- She travelled to yu es e"
#### d) Quotation marks
Quotation marks may appear in your direct speech sentences eg
> ( eng_003 "She said, "Make sure you escape quotation marks!"" )
> 
Escape them using a backslash (\) like this:

> ( eng_003 "She said, \"Make sure you escape quotation marks!\"" )
#### e) Foreign words
This is a hard one to solve because in some languages, normal speech will have words from other languages. Should they be pronounced to like they are in the original language or following your target languages pronunciation?
If they appear in few sentences, and you have a lot of sentences, you can ignore the sentences all together. 

#### f) Variations in recorded audio
When your recordings were done in different sessions and different mics, there most likely will be variations in the volume and other characteristics of the audio. You need to power normalize the recordings to reduce that.
Running `./bin/get_wavs recording/*.wav` in the steps that will be outlined below will do that for you.

After making all the necessary changes, name your script file as `txt.done.data`.

### 3.2. Set up your environment.
Set up the prerequisite libraries detailed in the prerequisites section of [Selecting Good Prompts](selecting-prompts.md/#prerequisites).

After that, download and run [festvox_setup.sh](http://tts.speech.cs.cmu.edu/awb/11-492/homework/tts/fest_build.sh).
On your terminal run:
```
chmod +x festvox_setup.sh
./festvox_setup.sh
```
If you are using OSX, running the script won't complete because of an error. Follow the [instructions](setup_festvox_osx.md) here to fix it.

### 3.3 Train your model
We will use a language called *new* and a voice talent with initials *sp* as an example.
1. Export environment variables below by replacing path-to with the path to your `build` folder that you set up above.
```angular2html
export ESTDIR=PATH-TO/build/speech_tools
export FESTVOXDIR=PATH-TO/build/festvox
export SPTKDIR=/PATH-TO/build/SPTK
export FLITEDIR=/PATH-TO/build/flite
```
2. Setup voice directory
```angular2html
mkdir cmu_new_sp
cd cmu_new_sp
$FESTVOXDIR/src/clustergen/setup_cg cmu new sp
```

3. Copy txt.done.data and audio files to your voice directory
```
cp -p WHATEVER/txt.done.data etc/
cp -p WHATEVER/wav/*.wav recording/ 
 ```
4. Power normalize and prune silences
```angular2html
./bin/get_wavs recording/*.wav
./bin/prune_silence wav/*.wav
./bin/prune_middle_silences wav/*.wav
```
5. build voice templates
```
$FESTVOXDIR/src/grapheme/make_cg_grapheme
```
6. Build a random forest based voice model 

This process consumes a lot of memory, make sure you have enough and can take around 15 hrs depending on the size of your prompt list.
```angular2html
nohup ./bin/build_cg_rfs_voice &
```
## 4. Evaluating Synthesizer Accuracy
When the building process is complete, you will have a test directory in your voice directory. 
Your synthesized voices can be found in tts_rf3 inside test directory.

To check the performance of the model, look at two files;
`mcd-base.out` and `mcd-rf3.out`. The last four lines in these files contains the metrics, see example below. 
```
all  mean 4.779275 std 307.545312 var 94584.118855 n 3149025
F0   mean 17.620242 std 16.647217 var 277.129829 n 125961
noF0 mean 0.230314 std 0.453159 var 0.205354 n 3023064
MCD  mean 6.465406 std 2.540568 var 6.454484 n 125961
```
Look at the mean of `MCD` row where lower is better and, the score in mcd-rf3.out should be lower than mcd-base.out. Good scores are lower than 7.
## 5. Improving Your System

Once the system is created, there are several ways to improve it. The mcd-rf3.out can help you to quickly improve it.
1. Synthesis failed 

Look at the lines in mcd-rf3.out that had failed (new_1049) or had magic numbers (new_0848) as shown below and listen to the corresponding wav file.
```angular2html
Warning: det <= 0. Using Prasanna's magic numbers in 3 of 1321 frames
CG test_resynth new_0849


CG test_resynth new_1069 Failed
```
   * If the voice talent didn't say the exact words in your txt.done.data file, change your txt.done.data to reflect what was spoken.
   * If the spelling is different let's say a foreign word or abbreviations, change it to its pronunciation spelling eg `word` to `wad`. 
2. Listen to the outputs that failed like above and others in your test file and compare with the corresponding recorded audio. If the recorded audio was really bad, you can exclude it from the wav folder in your next run.
3. Get better quality recordings with less noise and more consistency or just more recordings.

Commit message:

corrected errors in speech synthesis README

speech-synthesis/README.md, after:

# Building Speech Synthesis for New Languages

Speech synthesis is the task of generating speech from text. It is useful if you want to build a speech interface.
For a speech synthesizer, voice recordings from one person is usually required for consistency and natural sounding output.

## 1. Collecting Data

There are many sources for speech data that can be used to train systems. It'd be a good idea to take a look here to see if there is data that you can use.

* [CMU Wilderness Corpus](https://github.com/festvox/datasets-CMU_Wilderness): This is a very broad corpus with 699 languages.

If there is none, follow the steps in *[Creating Data](#2-creating-data)* section to create a corpus.
## 2. Creating Data
The goal here is to create a speech corpus of aligned speech recordings and their transcriptions to be used to build the synthesizer. 
1. Gather textual sentences in your language. You should aim at getting atleast 1 million words. Keep in mind:
   - The copyright of the data you have gathered; make sure it is sufficient for your usage and distribution needs. [Click here](https://aclanthology.org/L18-1202/) for information on licensing for Natural language Processing.
   - The text should be in the same encoding, see [this resource](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/64860/best-way-to-convert-text-files-between-character-sets) for details on how you can convert between encodings.
2. Select sentences from this corpus to be used to build your synthesizer. There is a quick guide on how to do so [here](selecting-prompts.md). 
 For a detailed explanation, read [this documentation](http://festvox.org/bsv/c2176.html) on how to select "good" sentences
 and follow [these instructions](https://github.com/festvox/datasets-CMU_Wilderness) from CMU Wilderness project from the *Prerequisites* to the *Make Dependencies* sections to install software needed to run the instructions on the documentation.
3. Identify a voice talent (person whose voices are recorded and will be used to build the synthesizer) who is fluent in the language and/or domain you are working on. Details on considerations are [available here](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/cognitive-services/speech-service/record-custom-voice-samples#choose-your-voice-talent).
4. Get consent from your voice talent allowing you to use their voice for your intended usage and distribution purposes. 
5. Guide available [here.](http://festvox.org/bsv/x794.html)
6. Record the selected sentences.

At the end of these steps, you should have your recorded speech corpus ready for the next step.

### Recording tips
* There should be little to no noise, a studio environment is best.
* If you are using a mobile device, you can use an app that will save your recordings in .wav format. 
For iOS you can use [one of these apps](https://www.iosappweekly.com/record-sound-mp3-wav-format-iphone/) for example.
* The distance between the voice talent's mouth and the microphone should be constant, so it is best to use a microphone attached to the speakers head for example using headsets or AirPods
* If you are going to record in multiple sessions, record at the same time period for all your sessions to avoid variations in the voice 
(e.g. at 10:00 am - 12:30 pm - this time is good because it is not right after one gets up and not late in the evening when one is tired, so one's voice is likely at its best).
* The utterances should be consistent in terms of speed etc. Avoid excited speech as it has a lot of variations. 
* If you are recording a bunch of sentences continuously in one recording, make sure the voice talent gives a hint as to which sentence they are reading such that it will be easier to process e.g. 
 
     " ... [PAUSE] sentence nine [PAUSE]  I looked for Mary and Samantha at the bus station. [PAUSE] sentence ten [PAUSE] Jacob stood on his tiptoes.[PAUSE]..... "
* [Click here](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/cognitive-services/speech-service/record-custom-voice-samples#recording-your-script) for more tips.
## 3. Training a Speech Synthesizer
There are generally two approaches to building a speech synthesizer/Text-to-Speech(TTS):
1. Standard/traditional TTS: Uses statistical, traditional machine learning and programming techniques
2. Neural TTS: Uses deep learning techniques

In this guide we will build a speech synthesizer using the standard approach.
Specifically, we are going to build a grapheme based synthesizer as it is easier when you have limited resources. 
For detailed explanation, see the Festvox tutorial on [Grapheme-based synthesizer](http://festvox.org/bsv/c3485.html). 
### 3.1 Prepare your data
If you followed step two above, you have your script file with textual utterances and corresponding recorded wav files. 
#### a) Align your utterances and wav files
The first step is to make sure that your wav files are aligned with your script.  
Your script should be in the following format:
> ( new_0001 "text in your language ..." )
> 
>( new_0002 "more text in your language ..." )
* Start each sentence with a `(` and end with a `)` leaving spaces between the brackets and text following/before.
* Replace `new` with anything you want, eg your language code or domain, leaving no spaces in between.
* The utterance should be in quotation marks.
* Precede other quotation marks with a backslash (\\).

Proceed to rename your wav files with the corresponding name. Eg, the first audio will be `new_0001.wav`
#### b) Numbers and symbols
If your script contains digits 0-9 and symbols like $, %, replace them with their word equivalent.
> She gave me $200. - She gave me two hundred dollars.
> 
> My battery level is at 50%. - My battery level is at fifty percent

If you followed the [Selecting Good Prompts](selecting-prompts.md) guide you probably won't have these issues.
#### c) Acronyms
You might have  acronyms like *USA* in your utterances.
You might want to change the text to how it is pronounced in your language. For example in my language I would change:
> She travelled to USA -- She travelled to YU ES E"
#### d) Quotation marks
Quotation marks may appear in your direct speech sentences eg
> ( eng_003 "She said, "Make sure you escape quotation marks!"" )
> 
Escape them using a backslash (\) like this:

> ( eng_003 "She said, \"Make sure you escape quotation marks!\"" )
#### e) Foreign words
In some languages, normal speech will have words from other languages. During recording, the challenge is whether to pronounce them like they are in the language of origin or following your target language's pronunciation. Either way, change the script to reflect how it was pronounced by the voice talent, eg "word" to "wad".

#### f) Variations in recorded audio
When your recordings were done in different sessions and/or different microphones or microphone distance, there most likely will be variations in the volume and other characteristics of the audio. You need to power normalize the recordings to reduce their effect.
Running `./bin/get_wavs recording/*.wav` as part of the steps that will be outlined below will do that for you.

After making all the necessary changes, name your script file as `txt.done.data`.

### 3.2. Set up your environment.
Set up the prerequisite libraries detailed in the prerequisites section of [Selecting Good Prompts](selecting-prompts.md/#prerequisites).

After that, download and run [festvox_setup.sh](http://tts.speech.cs.cmu.edu/awb/11-492/homework/tts/fest_build.sh).
On your terminal run:
```
chmod +x festvox_setup.sh
./festvox_setup.sh
```
If you are using OSX, running the script won't complete because of an error. Follow the [instructions](setup_festvox_osx.md) here to fix it.

### 3.3 Train your model
We will use a language called *new* and a voice talent with initials *sp* as an example.
1. Export environment variables below by replacing PATH-TO with the location of the `build` folder that you set up above.
```angular2html
export ESTDIR=PATH-TO/build/speech_tools
export FESTVOXDIR=PATH-TO/build/festvox
export SPTKDIR=/PATH-TO/build/SPTK
export FLITEDIR=/PATH-TO/build/flite
```
2. Setup voice directory
```angular2html
mkdir cmu_new_sp
cd cmu_new_sp
$FESTVOXDIR/src/clustergen/setup_cg cmu new sp
```

3. Copy txt.done.data and audio files to your voice directory
```
cp -p WHATEVER/txt.done.data etc/
cp -p WHATEVER/wav/*.wav recording/ 
 ```
4. Power normalize and prune silences
```angular2html
./bin/get_wavs recording/*.wav
./bin/prune_silence wav/*.wav
./bin/prune_middle_silences wav/*.wav
```
5. Build voice templates
```
$FESTVOXDIR/src/grapheme/make_cg_grapheme
```
6. Build a random forest based voice model 

This process consumes a lot of memory, make sure you have enough and can take around 15 hrs depending on the size of your prompt list.
```angular2html
nohup ./bin/build_cg_rfs_voice &
```
## 4. Evaluating Synthesizer Accuracy
When the building process is complete, you will have a test directory in your voice directory. 
Your synthesized voices can be found in `test/tts_rf3` directory.

To check the performance of the model, look at two files;
`mcd-base.out` and `mcd-rf3.out`. The last four lines in these files contain the metrics, see example below. 
```
all  mean 4.779275 std 307.545312 var 94584.118855 n 3149025
F0   mean 17.620242 std 16.647217 var 277.129829 n 125961
noF0 mean 0.230314 std 0.453159 var 0.205354 n 3023064
MCD  mean 6.465406 std 2.540568 var 6.454484 n 125961
```
Check the mean of `MCD` row (lower is better). The score in mcd-rf3.out should be lower than mcd-base.out and decent scores are lower than 7. Means lower than 6 are good and you should aim at getting there.
## 5. Improving Your System

Once the system is created, there are several ways to improve it.
1. Look at the lines in `mcd-rf3.out` file that had failed (new_1049) or had magic numbers used (new_0849) as shown below and listen to the corresponding wav file.
```angular2html
Warning: det <= 0. Using Prasanna's magic numbers in 3 of 1321 frames
CG test_resynth new_0849


CG test_resynth new_1069 Failed
```
   * If the voice talent didn't say the exact words in your txt.done.data file, change your txt.done.data to reflect what was spoken.
   * If the spelling is different let's say a foreign word or abbreviations, change it to its pronunciation spelling eg `word` to `wad`. 
2. Listen to the outputs that failed like above and others in your test file and compare with the corresponding recorded audio. If the recorded audio was really bad, you can exclude it from the wav folder in your next run.
3. Get better quality recordings with less noise and more consistency or just more recordings.

## 6. Using and Porting your System to a Device
TODO : How to use flite for Android
